# Vacation Planner App
This is my repository for a vacation planner app which I created using Android Studio with java and xml. People can use this application to plan out their travel when they are going on vacations and neatly organize their plans all in one place! **One thing the user MUST do for the app to work properly is go into the app settings and turn on storage permissions** In my implementation of the code for this project, I utilized many of the core concepts of java and object-oriented programming, including Inheritance, Polymorphism, GUI Programming, Exception Handling, Object I/O, Dynamic Data Structures, and much more.

## JavaDoc
The link for the javadoc of this project is *file:///Users/subram43/Android%20Studio%20Projects/TravelPlanner/index.html*
The javadoc contains a description of each java class utilized in this project and a description of each of the fields and methods for each class

## App Features and Design
  * **Splash Screen**
    - This screen is the screen that shows up when the user starts the app. It is a blue screen with the app's logo in the middle. It shows up for 1.5 seconds before going to the Start Screen.
  * **Start Screen**
    - This is the main menu screen that shows up when the user starts the app. This screen has a welcome message to welcome the user to the app and asking the user what they would like to do. It gives the user the option to either view their current list of their vacations, or to create a new vacation, with buttons leading to either screen.
  * **Vacation Activity Screen**
    - This is the activity screen that shows up when the user wants to add a new vacation, or modify an existing one. If this activity is entered through the start activity screen, this activity will prompt the user to enter a vacation name, location, start date, and end date. Once the user clicks the create vacation button, a new vacation will be created with those fields
  * **Main Activity Screen**
    - This activity screen contains the current list of vacations, listed in chronological order. The user can click on a specific vacation to see that vacation's specific details and events.
  * **Vacation Specific Activity Screen**
    - This activity screen contains the information and details about the selected vacation's name, location, dates, and the list of events in that vacation. At the top of the screen are text boxes with the vacation's name, location, and dates. If the user clicks on these text boxes, they will be prompted to the Vacation Activity Screen, where they can modify that existing vacation's details. Below these text boxes are buttons for the user to add a new Transportation or Leisure Event to the existing list of vacations. Below these buttons are a list of events in that vacation, listed in chronological order. If the user clicks on one of these events in the list, they will be taken to either the Transportation Event Activity Screen or Leisure Event Activity Screen to modify that event's details.
  * **Transportation Event Activity Screen**
    - A transportation event is an event in the vacation which involves commute. This activity allows the user to add a new transportation event to a specific vacation's list of events, or modify an existing transportation event. This screen prompts the user to fill out the details of the transportation event, including fields that are common to all events (name, date, time), and three fields unique to transportation events (mode, origin, and destination). This app is also designed in a way that the user must enter a date that is within the range of the vacation's dates or they will be asked to re-enter the date until they do so.
  * **Leisure Event Activity Screen**
    - A leisure event is any event in the vacation not involving commute. This activity allows the user to add a new leisure event to a specific vacation's list of events, or modify an existing leisure event. This screen prompts the user to fill out the details of the leisure event, including fields that are common to all events (name, date, time), and two fields unique to leisure events (location, and optional notes).
    
## Implementation of Core Java/Object-Oriented Programming Concepts
  * **Inheritance**
    - In implementing the code for this project, I utilized inheritance in the creation of an event for a specific vacation. In our project, there are two types of events (transportation and leisure), both having characteristics common to all events (name, date, and time). However, both also have characteristics unique to their specific type of event. Transportation Events have a transportation mode, origin, and destination, while Leisure Events have a location and optional notes about the event. In the implementation of the code for this project, I created a superclass, Event, which has fields representing the characteristics common to all events, and two subclasses of Event, TransportationEvent and LeisureEvent, which contain fields unique to their specific events
  * **Polymorphism**
    - Along with the inheritance I used to create the two subclasses of Event, I also utilized Polymorphism to make the Event class abstract. I chose to do this because it does not make sense for one to instantiate an Event on its own, but to create Events object which takes on one of its two forms, either a transportation event or a leisure event.
  * **GUI Programming**
    - In creating an android application in which users can trigger certain touch events and the app must respond accordingly, GUI programming is critical for the app to function. In this application, I used different types of action listeners to listen to touch events by the user and have the app respond by taking the user to a different activity or saving the user's information. The two types of action listeners I used were onItemClickListener() and the basic onClickListener(). I used the onItemClickListener() to respond to the user when they click on an item in a list, whether it was a list of vacations or a list of events. For all other buttons or text fields, I used onClickListener() to have the program respond accordingly based on what the user clicks.
  * **Exception Handling**
    - Exception handling was necessary in the implementation of this project, as I had instances where I needed to parse an int into a Date or use File and Object Input and Output. Since these are places where errors can happen and crash the app, it was necessary to include try-catch blocks to handle the code that could potentially crash the program. In any application, it is important to make the code robust in a way that it won't crash regardless of what the user does.
  * **Dynamic Data Structures**
    - In this project, storing data was definitely the most important part of the application. When users create, remove, or modify vacations and events, we need to constantly update the current list of vacations and events. To do this, we need dynamic data structures. The dynamic data structure I used in this project was Array Lists. When we want to be able to do all the things we can with vacations, Array Lists are very convenient for us to constantly update the list based on what the user wants to do.
  * **Object I/O**
    - One of the most important things I needed to make this app fully functioning is the ability to store everything and resume with the same data if the user closes down the app and restarts again. Without external storage, all the memory would get wiped off when the user closes down the app. For this reason, I used Java's io library to create File and Object Input and Output streams to read and write the data to and from external storage whenever the user closes down the app. This way, when the user restarts the app after closing it down, all their vacations and details will be saved from the previous time they made changes. To do this, I created a class called FileSaver, designated specifically to read and write to external storage. This class contains two static methods, readVacationList() and writeVacationList(). The writeVacationList() method will write and store the list of vacations when the user closes down the app from any screen. the readVacationList() method will read the list of vacations from external storage to resume the activity with the saved list of vacations when the user opens the app again.
